docs: dynamic host volumes API (#24789)
hashicorp/nomad: website/content/api-docs/volumes.mdx

# Volumes HTTP API

The `/volume` and `/volumes` endpoints are used to query for and interact with

> Container Storage Interface (CSI) volumes and Dynamic Host Volumes.

Author: Style question which will impact all following docs: should the name of a feature like Dynamic Host Volumes be capitalized? We've done so previously in a few places where a feature is a big high-level component like "Nomad Variables" or "Workload Identity" but I'm not sure if that's really the right style?

Reviewer: The [Eng writing style guide](https://github.com/hashicorp/engineering-docs/blob/main/writing/style-guide.md#capitalization-and-proper-nouns) says not to capitalize feature names. I confirmed with the Education team here that we should not be turning features into Things With Names<sup>TM</sup>.

| ------ | ------------- | ------------------ |
| `GET`  | `/v1/volumes` | `application/json` |

The table below shows this endpoint's support for [blocking queries][] and
[required ACLs][].

| Blocking Queries | ACL Required                                                 |
|------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|
| `YES`            | `namespace:csi-list-volume`<br/>`namespace:host-volume-read` |

### Parameters

- `type` `(string: "")` - Specifies the type of volume to query. One of `csi` or

>   `host`. The `host` value queries dynamic host volumes. This is specified as a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `host`. The `host` value queries dynamic host volumes. Specify this as a
```

>   query string parameter. Returns an empty list if omitted.

Author: I just checked and this is wrong, actually. We return 404. Will fix.

]
```

### Sample Response for Dynamic Host Volumes

```json
[
  {
    "CapacityBytes": 1048576000,
    "CreateIndex": 42,
    "CreateTime": 1736191825846395400,
    "ID": "3735cc2c-cc64-11ef-89ed-bfb5b3bc38ea",
    "ModifyIndex": 64,
    "ModifyTime": 1736191825846395400,
    "Name": "example",
    "Namespace": "default",
    "NodeID": "5c5830d0-cc64-11ef-a293-4f03e55969ea",
    "NodePool": "default",
    "PluginID": "plugin-id1",
    "State": "ready"
  }
]
```

## Read CSI Volume

This endpoint reads information about a specific CSI volume.

| Method | Path                        | Produces           |
| ------ | --------------------------- | ------------------ |
| `GET`  | `/v1/volume/csi/:volume_id` | `application/json` |

> The table below shows this endpoint's support for [blocking queries][] and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table shows this endpoint's support for [blocking queries][] and
```
For accessibility, avoid using directional text (below, above).

}
```

> ## Register CSI Volume

Reviewer 2: just noting that this and the other CSI headers will change the anchor link, which could break folks' bookmarks

`/volumes#register-volume` => `/volumes#register-csi-volume`

I do think it's an improvement, but wanted to mention the trade-off.

Author: Yeah, I don't think there's a good way around that unfortunately without leaving vague section headers.

This endpoint registers an external CSI volume with Nomad. The volume must exist

> in the external storage provider (see [Create CSI Volume][] below).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the external storage provider. Refer to the [Create CSI Volume][] section for details.
```

| ------ | --------------------------- | ------------------ |
| `PUT`  | `/v1/volume/csi/:volume_id` | `application/json` |

> The table below shows this endpoint's support for [blocking queries][] and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table shows this endpoint's support for [blocking queries][] and
```

| ------ | ---------------------------------- | ------------------ |
| `PUT`  | `/v1/volume/csi/:volume_id/create` | `application/json` |

> The table below shows this endpoint's support for [blocking queries][] and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table shows this endpoint's support for [blocking queries][] and
```

```

## Deregister CSI Volume

This endpoint deregisters an external CSI volume from Nomad. It is an error to
deregister a volume that is in use.

| Method   | Path                        | Produces           |
| -------- | --------------------------- | ------------------ |
| `DELETE` | `/v1/volume/csi/:volume_id` | `application/json` |

> The table below shows this endpoint's support for [blocking queries][] and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table shows this endpoint's support for [blocking queries][] and
```

| -------- | ---------------------------------- | ------------------ |
| `DELETE` | `/v1/volume/csi/:volume_id/delete` | `application/json` |

> The table below shows this endpoint's support for [blocking queries][] and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table shows this endpoint's support for [blocking queries][] and
```

    https://localhost:4646/v1/volume/csi/volume-id1/delete
```

## Detach CSI Volume

This endpoint detaches an external CSI volume from a Nomad client node. It is an
error to detach a volume that is in use.

| Method   | Path                               | Produces           |
| -------- | ---------------------------------- | ------------------ |
| `DELETE` | `/v1/volume/csi/:volume_id/detach` | `application/json` |

> The table below shows this endpoint's support for [blocking queries][] and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table shows this endpoint's support for [blocking queries][] and
```

    https://localhost:4646/v1/volume/csi/volume-id/detach?node=00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000
```

## List External CSI Volumes

This endpoint lists storage CSI volumes that are known to the external storage
provider but may not be registered with Nomad. Only CSI plugins that implement
the [Controller][csi_plugins_internals] interface with the `LIST_VOLUMES`
capability support this endpoint.

| Method | Path                   | Produces           |
|--------|------------------------|--------------------|
| `GET`  | `/v1/volumes/external` | `application/json` |

> The table below shows this endpoint's support for [blocking queries][] and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table shows this endpoint's support for [blocking queries][] and
```

}
```

## Delete CSI Volume Snapshot

This endpoint deletes a CSI volume snapshot from the external storage
provider. Only CSI plugins that implement the
[Controller][csi_plugins_internals] interface with the `CREATE_DELETE_SNAPSHOT`
capability support this endpoint.

| Method   | Path                   | Produces           |
| -------- | ---------------------- | ------------------ |
| `DELETE` | `/v1/volumes/snapshot` | `application/json` |

> The table below shows this endpoint's support for [blocking queries][] and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table shows this endpoint's support for [blocking queries][] and
```

| ------ | ---------------------- | ------------------ |
| `GET`  | `/v1/volumes/snapshot` | `application/json` |

> The table below shows this endpoint's support for [blocking queries][] and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table shows this endpoint's support for [blocking queries][] and
```

}
```

## Read Dynamic Host Volume

> This endpoint reads information about a specific Dynamic Host Volume.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This endpoint reads information about a specific dynamic host volume.
```

| Method | Path                         | Produces           |
|--------|------------------------------|--------------------|
| `GET`  | `/v1/volume/host/:volume_id` | `application/json` |

> The table below shows this endpoint's support for [blocking queries][] and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table shows this endpoint's support for [blocking queries][] and
```

[required ACLs][].

| Blocking Queries | ACL Required                 |
|------------------|------------------------------|
| `YES`            | `namespace:host-volume-read` |

### Parameters

- `:volume_id` `(string: <required>)` - Specifies the ID of the

>   volume. This must be the full ID. This is specified as part of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  volume. This must be the full ID. Specify this as part of the
```

  path.

### Sample Request

```shell-session
$ curl \
    https://localhost:4646/v1/volume/host/c0f7ee7d-5cc6-92fd-f2b5-14b79f01979f
```

### Sample Response

```json
{
  "Allocations": [],
  "CapacityBytes": 49283072,
  "CreateIndex": 11,
  "CreateTime": 1736191993011594200,
  "HostPath": "/run/nomad/dev/alloc_mounts/c0f7ee7d-5cc6-92fd-f2b5-14b79f01979f",
  "ID": "c0f7ee7d-5cc6-92fd-f2b5-14b79f01979f",
  "ModifyIndex": 12,
  "ModifyTime": 1736191993011594200,
  "Name": "external-plugin",
  "Namespace": "default",
  "NodeID": "670cb259-bc26-653b-e316-655af04ad260",
  "NodePool": "default",
  "Parameters": {
    "hello": "world"
  },
  "PluginID": "example-plugin-mkfs",
  "RequestedCapabilities": [
    {
      "AccessMode": "single-node-writer",
      "AttachmentMode": "file-system"
    }
  ],
  "RequestedCapacityMaxBytes": 50000000,
  "RequestedCapacityMinBytes": 50000000,
  "State": "ready"
}
```

## Create Dynamic Host Volume

> This endpoint creates a Dynamic Host Volume and registers it with Nomad.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This endpoint creates a dynamic host volume and registers it with Nomad.
```

> The response body will include the volume definition with the `ID` and `NodeID`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response body includes the volume definition with the `ID` and `NodeID`
```

> fields populated. Making the same request without the ID will create a new

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fields populated. Making the same request without the ID creates a new
```

> volume on a different node. Making a request with the ID set will update the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
volume on a different node. Making a request with the ID set updates the
```

volume to the new parameters, if possible.

| Method | Path                     | Produces           |
|--------|--------------------------|--------------------|
| `PUT`  | `/v1/volume/host/create` | `application/json` |

> The table below shows this endpoint's support for [blocking queries][] and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table shows this endpoint's support for [blocking queries][] and
```

[required ACLs][].

| Blocking Queries | ACL Required                                                                                                                   |
|------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `NO`             | `namespace:host-volume-create` or<br/>`namespace:host-volume-write`.<br/>`namespace:sentinel-override` if `PolicyOverride` set |

### Parameters

- `Volume` `(Volume: <required>)` - Specifies the JSON definition of the host
  volume. You should include the ID field if you are updating an existing
  volume.

> - `PolicyOverride` `(bool: false)` - If set, any soft mandatory Sentinel
>   policies will be overridden. This allows a volume to be created when it would
>   be denied by policy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `PolicyOverride` `(bool: false)` - If set, Nomad overrides any soft mandatory Sentinel
  policies. This setting allows creating a volume when creation is
 denied by policy.
```

    }
  }
}
```

### Sample Request

```shell-session
$ curl \
    --request PUT \
    --data @payload.json \
    https://localhost:4646/v1/volume/host/create
```

### Sample Response

```json
{
  "Volume": {
    "Allocations": [],
    "CapacityBytes": 21474836480,
    "Constraints": [
      {
        "LTarget": "${attr.kernel.name}",
        "RTarget": "linux",
        "Operand": "="
      }
    ],
    "CreateIndex": 11,
    "CreateTime": 1736191993011594200,
    "ID": "c0f7ee7d-5cc6-92fd-f2b5-14b79f01979f",
    "ModifyIndex": 11,
    "ModifyTime": 1736191993011594200,
    "Name": "example",
    "Namespace": "default",
    "NodeID": "45460554-cc67-11ef-84b7-33d383a55487",
    "NodePool": "prod",
    "Parameters": {
      "foo": "bar"
    },
    "PluginID": "mkdir",
    "RequestedCapabilities": [
      {
        "AccessMode": "single-node-writer",
        "AttachmentMode": "file-system"
      },
      {
        "AccessMode": "single-node-writer",
        "AttachmentMode": "block-device"
      }
    ],
    "RequestedCapacityMaxBytes": 21474836480,
    "RequestedCapacityMinBytes": 10737418240,
    "State": "pending"
  },
  "Warnings": null
}
```

## Register Dynamic Host Volume

> This endpoint registers an already-created Dynamic Host Volume with Nomad.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This endpoint registers an already-created dynamic host volume with Nomad.
```

or "existing" instead of "already-created"

| Method | Path                       | Produces           |
|--------|----------------------------|--------------------|
| `PUT`  | `/v1/volume/host/register` | `application/json` |

> The table below shows this endpoint's support for [blocking queries][] and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table shows this endpoint's support for [blocking queries][] and
```

[required ACLs][].

| Blocking Queries | ACL Required                                                                                                                     |
|------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `NO`             | `namespace:host-volume-register` or<br/>`namespace:host-volume-write`.<br/>`namespace:sentinel-override` if `PolicyOverride` set |

### Parameters

- `Volume` `(Volume: <required>)` - Specifies the JSON definition of the host
  volume. You should include the ID field if you are updating an existing
  volume.

> - `PolicyOverride` `(bool: false)` - If set, any soft mandatory Sentinel
>   policies will be overridden. This allows a volume to be registered when it
>   would be denied by policy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `PolicyOverride` `(bool: false)` - If set, Nomad overrides any soft mandatory Sentinel
  policies. This setting allows creating a volume when creation is
 denied by policy.
```

### Sample Payload

```json
{
  "PolicyOverride": false,
  "Volume": {
    "Name": "example",
    "Namespace": "default",

>     "NodePool": "prod",

Reviewer 2: hadn't thought about this before -- should we require `NodeID` for DHV `register`?  if a vol already exists, it must exist on a specific node, eh?

I suppose if someone pre-populates a volume across a whole lot of nodes (in a pool, say), then `register` could be run repeatedly without a `NodeID`, until it starts to error that no nodes meet constraints...

Author: https://github.com/hashicorp/nomad/pull/24795

      "foo": "bar"
    }
  }
}
```

### Sample Request

```shell-session
$ curl \
    --request PUT \
    --data @payload.json \
    https://localhost:4646/v1/volume/host/register
```

### Sample Response

```json
{
  "Volume": {
    "Allocations": [],
    "CapacityBytes": 21474836480,
    "Constraints": [
      {
        "LTarget": "${attr.kernel.name}",
        "RTarget": "linux",
        "Operand": "="
      }
    ],
    "CreateIndex": 11,
    "CreateTime": 1736191993011594200,
    "ID": "c0f7ee7d-5cc6-92fd-f2b5-14b79f01979f",
    "ModifyIndex": 31,
    "ModifyTime": 1736191993721594200,
    "Name": "example",
    "Namespace": "default",
    "NodeID": "45460554-cc67-11ef-84b7-33d383a55487",
    "NodePool": "prod",
    "Parameters": {
      "foo": "bar"
    },
    "PluginID": "mkdir",
    "RequestedCapabilities": [
      {
        "AccessMode": "single-node-writer",
        "AttachmentMode": "file-system"
      },
      {
        "AccessMode": "single-node-writer",
        "AttachmentMode": "block-device"
      }
    ],
    "RequestedCapacityMaxBytes": 21474836480,
    "RequestedCapacityMinBytes": 10737418240,
    "State": "ready"
  },
  "Warnings": null
}
```

> ## Delete Dynamic Host Volume Volume

Reviewer 2: got an extra ` Volume` on the end here

> This endpoint deletes a Dynamic Host Volume, and deregisters it from Nomad. It

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This endpoint deletes a dynamic host volume, and deregisters it from Nomad. It
```

is an error to delete a volume that is in use.

| Method   | Path                                | Produces           |
|----------|-------------------------------------|--------------------|
| `DELETE` | `/v1/volume/host/:volume_id/delete` | `application/json` |

> The table below shows this endpoint's support for [blocking queries][] and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table shows this endpoint's support for [blocking queries][] and
```

[required ACLs][].

| Blocking Queries | ACL Required                                                        |
|------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `NO`             | `namespace:host-volume-write` or<br/>`namespace:host-volume-delete` |

### Parameters

- `:volume_id` `(string: <required>)` - Specifies the ID of the

>   volume. This must be the full ID. This is specified as part of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  volume. This must be the full ID. Specify this as part of the
```
